[Music]
rogue planets are planets that travel
through the universe alone
they inhabit the dark and vast space
between the stars
drifting alone through eternal darkness
no light warms their surfaces and
they're exposed to the freezing cold of
outer space
they know no seasons no days and no
nights which could give away the passing
of time
and yet rope planets might carry alien
life to all corners of the galaxy how
would that work and how does a planet
become a rogue anyway
[Music]
there are several very different things
that get called rogue planets for
example sub-brown dwarfs gas giants that
form from collapsing gas clouds and the
boring little brothers of brown dwarfs
they're a sort of failed star and we'll
now stop talking about them
a far more interesting sort of rogue are
terrestrial planets similar to earth
that got kicked out of their planetary
system
young star systems are dangerous places
where proto are battling for the
available mass guzzling up as much
material as possible
in this fight for dominance they collide
with each other or get dangerously close
to each other's orbits
if a very massive planet moves its orbit
closer to the star it can kick smaller
planets out of the system
but just because a planet has survived
the growing pains of formation doesn't
mean it's safe
planetary systems can be disrupted by
flybys from stars or black holes at any
point
up to half of all planets born could end
up as rogues
scientists don't agree on the numbers
but it's likely that at the very least
there are billions of rogue planets in
the milky way alone
most rogues will share the same
depressing fate as their star becomes
smaller day by day the planet's surface
quickly cools down to minus 270 degrees
celsius
if they have oceans they'll freeze and
become as hard as bedrock their
atmospheres will sink down to the
surface and eventually freeze too
but weirdly enough some of these frozen
dark deserts could harbor life
to understand how let's imagine a planet
similar to earth in the same order of
magnitude in terms of mass and
composition
if we put it into deep space how could
it still support life
as far as we understand the nature of
life there is one indispensable
ingredient it needs liquid water
water is important because it mixes
things both matter and energy which lets
interesting chemistry happen like life
so our planet needs enough energy to
keep at least a part of our oceans warm
enough to sustain liquid water
annoyingly about
99.97 percent of earth's energy budget
comes from the sun
so our imaginary rogue earth needs to
work with the 0.03 percent of energy it
has left which almost exclusively comes
from its hot center
earth's inner core is a giant metal ball
about as hot as the surface of the sun
that's surrounded by the outer core made
up of liquid metals that are very very
slowly solidifying releasing a lot of
heat in the process
as long as this process is ongoing our
planet will be geologically active with
solid and liquid material moving around
and transporting energy to the surface
where it can be harnessed as geothermal
energy
while the hot core of every planet will
cool off eventually this process takes
billions of years enough time for life
to come into existence and thrive
[Music]
there's even one scenario that could
allow an earth-like planet to have
oceans that are not frozen over if the
planet had an extremely dense and high
pressure hydrogen atmosphere the gas
would not freeze and could trap enough
of the heat trying to escape the planet
to enable oceans that extend all the way
to the surface
and there's another possible way to stay
warm moons
if a rope planet brings a moon or more
along with them a large enough moon
could inject additional energy into the
system via tidal forces
these forces stretch and squeeze the
planet a little bit every day like
kneading dough keeping it warm
but the most likely scenario for a rogue
bearing life is one with subglacial
oceans under a kilometer thick layer of
mostly water ice
these are not completely absurd since we
already have a few of them in the solar
system
so how could life sustain itself at the
bottom of a completely dark cold ocean
on earth deep down in our oceans in
complete darkness in volcanically active
areas there are hydrothermal vents
called black smokers
they spew out a cloud of black material
and hot water providing a constant flow
of minerals from earth's mantle
bacteria feed on the minerals and
produce organic materials which attracts
crustaceans bivalves snails fish octopus
and tube worms up to two meters long
not only are hydrothermal vents home to
an incredibly diverse group of living
beings but also a contender for the
place where life could have begun on
earth billions of years ago
in the dark ocean of a rogue planet
similar events or volcanic activity
could be the starting point and basis
for complex ecosystems we can only
imagine right now
one upside an ecosystem in a rogue
planet ocean has is that the environment
is extremely stable
the thick ice sheet protects it from all
sorts of extinction events and as long
as the energy from the core keeps on
coming things stay pretty much the same
the most likely forms of life are
bacteria and other microorganisms but
given enough time more complex alien
animals could feed on the smaller beings
and thrive
it's not impossible that intelligent
life could emerge in such an environment
if it did it would find itself in a
pretty weird world
constricted by an impassable wall of
rock-hard ice at the top and bedrock at
the bottom without any plants to store
star energy there would be no wood oil
or coal even if there were it's not like
you'd discover fire at the bottom of an
ocean
without this energy metals may never be
forged into useful things
our intelligent alien friends might
never break through the ice
they might never realize that there is
such a thing as outside and assume that
their small world is all there is
millions of generations might live and
die in these dark oceans ignorant of the
unbelievably big universe above the ice
until the core of their planet cools off
and all life vanishes
as the oceans completely freeze the
remnants of cultures and ecosystems will
be trapped in an icy grave forever
if you think about it it might be better
not to be aware of all that but the
concept is disturbing and exciting
the universe might be teeming with life
trapped on planets that are basically
impossible to leave
worlds like this could frequently pass
the solar system without us even knowing
maybe one day in the far future humans
will set foot on one of these frozen
worlds and try to say hello
okay so we love gloomy future scenarios
but let's go back to the present for a
different kind of surprise many of you
want to know how we make our videos so
we made a video about that
courtscast teamed up with skillshare our
favorite online learning community for
creators to make a three-part series of
classes where you can learn our unique
animation style with scenes from our
videos
but we're not the only ones telling you
our tips and tricks there
a skillshare premium membership gives
you unlimited access to more than 25 000
classes in all kinds of skills like
writing design and animation from
experts who know their stuff
the premium membership is as low as 10 a
month but as a treat the first 1000
people to use the link in the
description will get their first two
months for free
if you've always wanted to see how we
animate our videos and learn to do it
yourself this is your chance
[Music]
me